Advanced Deep Learning Project 2026

Weapon Detection & Threat Analysis

Technical Roadmap: Real-Time Weapon Detection &
Context-Aware Red Alert System
A Two-Person Collaborative Research Proposal
Project Domain: Computer Vision, Temporal Sequence Analysis, XAI

1

Project Abstract

Building upon the foundational work of previous academic terms (e.g., Driver Drowsiness and Dermal
Classification), this project transitions from simple object classification to Active Threat Intelligence. By fusing the high-speed detection capabilities of the YOLOv11/v12 architecture with the
global contextual understanding of Swin Transformers, we aim to build a system that identifies
firearms and bladed weapons while distinguishing them from benign handheld electronics. The project
culminates in an automated Red Alert System that triggers visual, auditory, and digital notifications.

2

Phase 1: Dataset Synthesis & Pre-processing

To achieve high precision in cluttered environments, we will implement a multi-stage data pipeline:
• Data Aggregation: A composite dataset of ≈45,000 images sourced from:
– University of Granada (SOHAS): Handgun and knife handling.
– Unidpro 2026: High-definition staged tactical scenarios.
– Simuletic Synthetic: Simulation of low-light and adverse weather CCTV feeds.
• Hard Negative Mining: Specifically labeling “Confuser Objects” (smartphones, wallets, drills,
umbrellas) to force the model to learn fine-grained discriminative features.
• Slicing Aided Hyper Inference (SAHI): Implementation of a tiling strategy for inference.
Given an image I, it is partitioned into overlapping patches Pi,j of size s × s:
[
[
I=
Pi,j =⇒ Inference(I) = NMS( Inference(Pi,j ))
(1)
i,j

This prevents the loss of feature resolution for small objects in 4K surveillance streams.

3

Phase 2: Hybrid Model Architecture

The system utilizes a state-of-the-art hybrid backbone to balance latency and accuracy.
• Backbone: YOLOv11 for local spatial feature extraction.
• Neck: Swin Transformer blocks using Shifted Windows (S-W-MSA) to capture long-range
dependencies between the person and the potential weapon.
• Loss Function: We utilize a compound loss including CIoU for bounding box regression and
Focal Loss for class imbalance:
Ltotal = λbox LCIoU + λcls [−αt (1 − pt )γ log(pt )]

1

(2)

Advanced Deep Learning Project 2026

4

Weapon Detection & Threat Analysis

Phase 3: Hand-Weapon Proximity & Threat Logic

An advanced alert should only fire if a weapon is being actively handled.
1. Detection Heads: The model will output two specific classes: Hand and Weapon.
2. Proximity Condition: Let Bh be the bounding box for a hand and Bw for a weapon. A threat
T is validated if:
(
Area(Bh ∩Bw )
1 if Area(B
>τ
h ∪Bw )
Threat(T ) =
(3)
0 otherwise
where τ is the empirically determined Intersection over Union (IoU) threshold.

5

Phase 4: Multimodal Red Alert System

Upon threat validation, a prioritized alert protocol is executed:
• Visual UI Alert: A flashing red border on the GUI implemented via a frame-counter modulo:
(
Red
if (f rame_idx (mod 10) < 5)
BorderColor =
(4)
Transparent else
• Auditory Trigger: Triggering a 1500Hz square wave alarm using the Pygame mixer.
• Digital Notification: Automated execution of an asynchronous Telegram Bot API request
to send a JPEG snapshot and the GPS coordinates of the camera to security personnel.

6

Phase 5: Explainability & Optimization
• XAI: Using Grad-CAM to visualize the gradient flow. This ensures the model is activating on
the trigger guard or blade edge rather than the carrier’s clothing.
• Quantization: Conversion of the PyTorch weights to TensorRT (INT8 precision) to ensure
the system maintains > 40 FPS on NVIDIA Jetson or RTX-series hardware.

7

8

Team Responsibility Matrix

Task Category

Partner A (Architect)

Partner B (Data/Alerts)

Model Development
Logic Layer
Alert Systems
Validation

Swin-Transformer Integration
Proximity Detection Algorithms
Telegram Bot & SMS Backend
TensorRT Quantization

Dataset Merging & Cleaning
SAHI Tiling Integration
OpenCV Visual/Audio Overlays
Grad-CAM & mAP Evaluation

Success Metrics
• Primary: mAP@0.5:0.95 ≥ 0.72.
• Secondary: False Positive Rate (FPR) on “Confuser Objects” < 2%.
• Inference Speed: ≤ 25ms per 1080p frame.

2

